>> Hello and
welcome to the Haskell weekly podcast. I'm your host,
Taylor Fausak. I'm the lead engineer at I.T. Pro
T.V.. With me today is one of the engineers on my
team. Cameron Gera. Thanks for joining me today, Cam.
>> Thanks for having me, Taylor. I'm excited to hang
out. Talk about
some Haskell.
>> Yeah, it's all set to be a good day
for podcasting.
>> Oh, yeah? Well, it's a great day in
October and you know, as I
love to say, it's Hacktoberfest. We've
got one week left to contribute.
Four pull requests to public
repositories. So go check
it out. Get a free T shirt. Sign up. It's awesome.
The link will be in the show notes and
specifically one that you know will help the
Haskell community and build the Haskell community learn
for Haskell, which is put up by Kowainik
to allow you to learn some of the
mechanics of Haskell and also do some
problem solving in Haskell. So get some real world
experience, so please, please, please go check that
out. If you haven't, you've got one week
left. It's gonna be awesome.
But enough about Hacktoberfest because that's the one
bit I've got at this point. What's what are we talking about
today? What's what's going on? What does the idea
of X G.H.C. 2021 excite you,
man?
>> It does. And that's exactly what we're gonna be talking about
today. So there was a reddit post over the
past week from one of the
members of the G.H.C. steering Committee
and he was polling the community, asking them
if they were interested in something that he was
calling G.H.C. 2021.
And I think the community was interested
because there were something like 200 comments
on this thread, which is pretty big for our little corner
of the reddit sphere
>> dang. That sounds like it got some traction,
you know? And it seems extreme to me because it's got
the X in front of it, because that that's the
language extension. But, you know, I thought that was pretty
cool to see.
>> Yeah, I like calling those. Ah, that's the extreme version of
Haskell Haskell X.
>> Yeah. I mean, there's extreme programming so extreme
Haskell sounds good to me.
Well, and something that came out
of this, you know, Reddit thread was
actually a proposal for this. And so, you know, I
think that's something else we'll be talking about today as well. Kind
of brief overview of what's kind of going
on. What is G.H.C.
2021? Why do we
need it? Stuff like that. So I'm really looking
forward to kind of diving in
today and really talking about stuff I
really haven't had to worry about.
Um, as an application developer, language
extensions, which this is kind of in motivation
of are kind of behind the scenes for me and what
I've done in my Haskell experience. But Taylor for
you, I think you've got a little more experience
with language extensions. What they
what they are and how they've progressed
in the language of Haskell over time.
>> Yeah, So I have some experience as an
application developer here. It I.T. pro T.V. and
previously at Freckle. But also, I
maintain some open source
libraries on Hackage as well, and I've seen
this progression happen. Most of it happened before I even
started programming Haskell. So it started way
back in 1998 and
there was a spec put out
for the language of Haskell and
it is just known as Haskell 98. So if you see that floating around the Web,
it's talking about the 1998 version of
the Haskell language
report.
>> Wow. So you're saying I could have
asked for Christmas when I was five years old for
Haskell 98?
>> Yeah. And you would have got
it,
>> man. I would have been so much better off if I
would've learned Haskell when I was five.
>> I'm not so sure about that. But I like where your head's
at.
>> Okay,
fair enough. Well, you know, we all we all come to the
world of programming in our own ways.
I mine is very different from a lot of co workers
and other people I know who have been programming since they
were in their young teens. I've only been programming in my
twenties, so that's a little bit of a difference.
But anyways, back to Haskell 98.
>> So Haskell 98 specifies all kinds of things
about the language itself and some
libraries like the prelude and all the core libraries and
stuff like that. And it turns out that as
Haskell started being used both in academia and in
industry and by hobbyists. There were some things
discovered in the report that weren't quite
ideal. So in
2010 people got together and
produced a new version of the Haskell report, which is Haskell
2010. So again, if you see that
floating around, that's what it means. The 2010 version of the Haskell language
report Haskell, 2010 doesn't
change a whole lot from Haskell 98
even though in that 12 year
span, you know, G.H.C. did a ton of
work. There were many other compilers that
came and went like U.H.C. and hugs
and a bunch of others that I'm forgetting right now.
Um, but Haskell, 2010 was pretty conservative in
what it changed last year. There was
some interest in producing yet another version of the language
report that would be called Haskell 2020.
That didn't end up happening for a bunch of
reasons.
>> I mean,
it's 2020 so it's pretty on par,
right? Yeah, nothing's going according to plan
in 2020. So
>> exactly. Yeah, we we should have seen it in 2019. That
this was a, harbinger of the things to
come, but yeah, Haskell, 2020 unfortunately, didn't
happen. But people are still
interested in improving on the language
report that came out in 2010 because lots of things have happened
in Haskell and in particular. One thing
that people are very excited about is
rolling language extensions into the base
language. So instead of having to
enable a bunch of extensions at the top of your source file or
put them as your default extensions for your package or
application, they'll just be part of
Haskell for everybody. And that's kind of what this
X G.H.C. 2021 proposed
flag is doing
>> right. It's taking us a step in that direction. At
least
>> it's not a full blown report. It's not a new
spec for Haskell, but it is saying this
is a set of extensions that we think can be
considered like the default set from here on
out,
>> right, and these, you know,
proposed language extensions, which I don't
think they have quite wrinkled out every detail of which ones they're
gonna include and stuff like that. But generally they're gonna go
towards the UN
controversial, relatively
quote unquote mundane,
harmless right harmless. That's much better
word I think that allows us
to kind of get used to these language
extensions that we may not know about we may
not ever have dealt with because
Vanilla Haskell lets us get by with what we need to
do.
>> Yeah, and to give an example of an extension that
may be included with Haskell with G.H.C.
2021. Like you said, they haven't landed
on a list of them. But one of the most
popular extensions is overloaded strings.
So in the same way that when you write a numeric
literal, it could be an integer value or it could be a
ratio or a float. Um,
normally in Haskell, when you write a string, it can only
be the string type in the prelude
but overloaded strings. Let's it be text or a byte
string or something else. Um, and this is an
extremely popular extension. It's enabled by default and
tons of places, and in the past three years running the
Haskell survey, it's been the number one most requested
default enabled extension for the, you know, next version of the
Haskell report, Um, so that's a prime
candidate for something that could be enabled by
G.H.C. 2021. And it's a
nice quality of life improvement that
probably won't break any existing code. It might,
but it's generally pretty conservative and
doesn't really change. Doesn't introduce new type level shenanigans
to the language. It doesn't change what things mean too much so that
that's probably the type of thing that will be included.
>> So cool. Well, I think that's a really
great step for the community.
Get a holistic bunch
of language extensions and and say, Hey,
this is what people want This is going to
be bundled up in this G.H.C.
2021 we'll let
people enable that rather than having to
list every extension or, you know, put the language
pragma in the top of their source file.
And there you go.
>> Yeah, and this is if you look at another
community like rust. They have this concept of an
edition where the rust compiler is
adding new features incrementally. I forget what their
release schedule is. I think it's every six weeks or something like that.
They're adding new features all the time, but you can
pick to stay with, like I think it's rust
2018. I'm not a rust developer, so I don't know what the
editions are, but you can say this is the set of features that I want and
that will stay stable through time. So this set of
extensions is kind of the same idea where you're going to say, I
want the recommended set of extensions as of
2021 then, you know, five years from now, maybe
you're still using that set because it works for you. Or maybe new versions have come
out. And you think, Yeah, I want to opt into that. one the 2023 or 2025
one
>> Right, So they let
it be stable. I know there was something
called Glasgow extensions
that was, you know, something that we could enable.
What didn't work about that?
>> Yeah, in the past. So for those not in the know
G.H.C., the flagship Haskell compiler,
stands for the glorious glasgow Haskell
compiler, and it accepts a
flag called glasgow extensions that
enables a kind of recommended set of
extensions. So This isn't
new ground necessarily. But what's different is that
Glasgow extensions could change
through releases of G.H.C.. So I don't
remember which version of G.H.C. it was that it came out. But
let's say that you were on 7.6 and you upgraded
7.8. This glasgow extensions flag might
mean something different between those two versions. In
comparison, this x G.H.C. 2021
flag is going to be consistent the same through
time,
>> right? So you can maybe iterate your
version of G.H.C.
20x
202x. You're gonna have the same
extensions, but you have to take that step in
changing to a new
version.
>>  You opt into the new stuff
>> where this other one was just always changing with
every new version of G.H.C., you could see how that could be
really annoying for, you know, maintaining
libraries, maintaining even an
application. Large applications. It would be
beyond frustrating because,
>> and especially frustrating for libraries. Because if you want to
support multiple versions of G.H.C.
and you want to use this flag because it's convenient,
you'll end up supporting some different set of
extensions for each version, which is super weird.
>> Yeah, well, I'm glad that they've come to
say, All right, we need a set version,
control of extensions, right? That's
not gonna be you know changing with each version of
G.H.C.. But what are some
other benefits about maybe taking a step this
way towards a grouped
set of extensions being imported by this
flag?
>> One benefit of this set of language extensions
all being bundled together with G.H.C. 2021 is
that you kind of get the best of both
worlds when it comes to explicit versus implicit.
One of the upsides of explicitly listing all of your
language extensions in each source file is
that all of the tooling can understand it. Anybody coming
into that file to read it can know which headspace to get into.
You know, if I load up a file and it's got 20 lines of
language extensions at the top and I see stuff like type in
type and functional dependencies and GADTs, then I'm like,
Okay, I'm gonna be putting on my type level programming hat
versus if I open up a file and I only see, uh,
let's say overloaded strings. Then I say, Okay,
this is probably gonna be pretty typical application level code,
nothing too fancy going
on.
>> And I think it also the current
listing out every extension helps
just that readability, too. Obviously that the
headspace, all that kind of jazz,
what's the other option? If you don't, you know,
without this new proposed flag,
what's the other option? And I think you touched on a little bit
earlier. Could you kind of expand on what may be some of the
benefits of that?
>> Absolutely. So the package
description, for whatever thing you're working on,
probably has a section in there of default
extensions and those are language extensions. that're going
to be enabled in every source file, regardless of if they're at the
top of the file or not. And this is
super convenient and great for
applications where, like for us at I.T. Pro
T.V., we can sit down as a
team and have a discussion about Do we want to
enable scoped type variables everywhere for
our application and furthermore, we can, turn it
on and see what happens? See if we get any weird bugs or weird errors or
anything like that. It's very easy for us to talk
about it and experiment with it. For libraries, it's a little bit
different because when you turn on an extension by
default, you're kind of selecting
for a particular contributor or
potential contributor to your project. You're saying
that in order to work with this project, you probably need to
understand these extensions that I'm turning on. And
so naturally, library developers are a little
more conservative when it comes to turning on default
language extensions because they want as many people as possible
to be able to contribute, which means keeping the
bar to clear low. So, for instance, I
really like the extension numeric underscores where you can
put underscores in numbers to kind of break them up
into, like, thousands groups. But I don't want to turn
that on as a language extension in any libraries that I
develop because it's just another bar to clear for somebody when they're looking at the source
code saying, Wait a minute, I didn't know you could have underscores in numbers, What
is this? And then they scroll up to the top of The file and they don't see an
extension there, and I'm like, What am I reading here? This isn't the same
language that I know, Um, and that's obviously an extreme
example. People will probably be able to figure out what's going on, but it would be
nice. If at the top, I could just say G.H.C.
2021 somebody could go there and read about all the things that
turns
on.
>> Yeah, I think that's great
insight. And, you know, kind of weighing some of
the benefits of, you know, the
explicitness for versus implicitness versus, you know what?
This proposed flag, I think
that really allows us
to kind of think about it, figure out what
feels right to us. Um, and having
some known set of extensions to
reference Sounds like a nice place to be,
because it gives you a good balance of implicit
versus explicit and kind of meets in the
middle there. Um alright,
Taylor. So we've talked about this new flag proposal.
What are some of the things
that kind of go into a new
proposal for G.H.C.? You know, you can use this
one as an example, obviously, because it's
right here. It kind of says hello. Here's how you you create a
proposal for G.H.C..
What? What's going on here?
>> There is a repository called G.H.C.
proposals, and that's where all these things end up. I think it
was set up. I want to say a year or two ago, Maybe.
Maybe it's older than that, but the
I'm an outsider to this process. So I'm explaining
what I have seen. I don't have any insight into this
necessarily. But this repository
is a place for people to open up a pull request
that contains document describing some
change They would like to make to G.H.C. or
Haskell or, I mean, usually G.H.C.. It's called
G.H.C. proposals, but sometimes they could be a little,
uh, more far reaching than that. So
taking this one as an example, it's saying, we want to introduce
this new extension flag called
G.H.C. 2021 when you enable this
flag, this is what's going to happen, and it
will turn on all of these extensions. Um, I don't have
the proposal in front of me, so I couldn't tell you what the current
set of extensions they're proposing is. But that's the gist of
what's going on here. And then there's a normal, you
know, GitHub comment thread attached to that where people
are discussing the pros and cons. Should we
do this? Should we not? Which extensions should be included?
All that kind of stuff you might expect to see on a discussion of
this.
>> Yeah, and I really appreciate that. There's
obviously some sort of template when creating these G.H.C.
proposals because it makes you answer these questions
that you may have not thought about and, you know, specifically
they talk about, you know, costs and drawbacks,
which I think is valuable
for someone who has this great idea to
really think about it and figure out how that
could impact the Haskell
community as a whole. And so I think
that their
cost and drawbacks to kind of what we've talked about,
like, kind of hides readability a
little bit with their new flag.
But at the same time, it still gives you a
reference point of where to go toe Look for what's going on.
And, you know, I think
another drawback and this is just when you
want to make any change is that there's gonna be
some heated debate. Somebody's not gonna wanna
be on board with this extension or with that extension,
and I think it creates conversation,
maybe heated debates, just depending on how you take
it. And you know, if it's phone call, it's a little
more personable where you know, if you're
chatting over a Git repo and
you're on this pull request making comments, you can get a little
short sometimes, which I think can create a little bit more
tension. But I think they're doing a good
job with trying to be more conservative rather
than just say, Yeah, let's bring all the
extensions in, like, Alright, let's let's bring in the
known set that's used by a vast majority
and. I think they've also kind of talked about how
this list gets curated, which I think it's nice that
they kind of documented that as well. So you know, if you're interested,
check out the show, notes the proposals. There
so thank you for kind of jumping into that. I know I
kind of threw off guard there with that question of
like,
>> no
problem happy to do it. And I also wanted to mention
I said this earlier. But this is a question that I have
included in the State of Haskell survey for the past
three years, and I'll be including it this year as well. Um,
it's not specific to G.H.C. 2021 but
language extensions are, a, popular topic in the
Haskell community. And in the survey, I
ask if we were to produce a new version of the
Haskell language report. Which extensions
would you want to be enabled by default? So there
is three years of data to look at their from the
community of which things should be on by
default. And, you know, clearly this is a slightly different
discussion that than that exactly. But I think there is
some cross pollination there,
>> right? So if you're the one who made this
extension or this proposal get with Taylor, he's got
some great data.
>> It's all out there. You don't need to collaborate with me,
but wouldn't mind. Also, I wanted to point out
that the name kind of implies that this is something that
could happen every year. So it's not
critically important that we get it exactly right on
the first year because we could try a set and
realize Wait a minute. This one probably shouldn't have been in there. So
let's take it out next year, and this other one probably should have been in there.
So let's add it and that hopefully will be a
relatively easy process versus making a new version of the
report
>> right, And I think it allows you to create a
change log to like from year to year. What's what's
changed? What's going on Before I decided, Oh, I wanna be
on 2022 now And you know,
they mentioned that in the proposal as well. So I think
that's a nice benefit and definitely a good
step in that direction. Obviously, we're
not going to sit here and debate which one should be in
because, you know, there's a lot out there.
There's a lot of options, and for
us when we have
enabled language extensions, a, majority of
the time it's been because of a library that
requires said language extension. So
I think as our our team grows at I.T. pro T.V.,
we've had more people come with other experience in Haskell. That says,
Oh, what about this one? Which leads to that
discussion you were talking about earlier, where we just kind
of figure out, you know, is this something you want to try?
Let's give it a shot. Let's give it a good old college
try and see what happens. I think
that's, you know, something they could do with
this, too, is like, it's gonna be a discussion. They're going to
come up with something to begin with, and they can
iterate on it, as as need be.
>> Yeah, And that's a pretty easy discussion for us to
have with eight people. So good luck
to them having that discussion with the thousands of people involved in the
Haskell community.
>> Good luck. Well, I think that's all we have
to say on this one. I think it's been a good podcast.
It's got to chat a little bit a little
more, Uh, a theoretical conversation of,
like, what should we do? What's this Gonna
dio with a little concrete in there? So I appreciate that.
Um, but yeah, I think I think that's gonna do it for us, right?
>> Yeah, that'll do it. Thank you for listening to the
Haskell weekly podcast. I've been your host, Taylor
Fausak, and with me was Cameron Gera.
If you'd like to follow us on social media, our twitter
handle is Haskell Weekly our Reddit user name
Also Haskell Weekly our GitHub user name. You guessed
it Haskell weekly. Our website, is Haskell
weekly dot News.
>> And today's show is brought to you by I.T. Pro
T.V., the e learning platform for
I.T. professionals, also our employer.
And they would love to extend an offer of 30%
off on I.T. Pro T.V. membership. So
the code will be a Haskell Weekly
30 or again that is Haskell Weekly
30 to get 30% off the lifetime of your
subscription I.T. pro T.V.
>> Thanks so much for listening, and we'll see you next week bye
>> peace.